Have you ever asked how long if you're enduring some challenging circumstance right now perhaps old age a serious illness or some other pressure such a question is very understandable or perhaps you're in the position of giving assistance and trying to encourage a family member or someone in the congregation who's going through a very difficult time right now and perhaps you've wondered the same question how long
how long that we all have to endure all of this asking that question puts us in good company to site one example at Psalm 13 1 and 2 King David asked the question how long four times in quick succession maybe you recall how long old Jehovah will you forget me forever how long will you hide your face from me how long will I have anxious concern
with grief in my heart each day how long will my enemy triumph over me David was a human a real person with real problems and real feelings
Habakkuk was another human just like us who was plagued with questions and he asked the same how long
how Jehovah responded to Habakkuk can strengthen our resolve to wait just a little while longer on Jehovah to wait patiently please open your Bible with me to Habakkuk chapter 1 and let's read verses 2 and 3
and notice the succession of six emotion filled questions Habakkuk chapter 1 verses 2 and 3 how long oh Jehovah must I cry for help but you do not hear how long must I ask for help from violence but you do not intervene why do you make me witness wrong doing and why do you tolerate oppression why do you tolerate oppression
higher destruction and violence before me and why do quarreling and conflict abound do you think those were good questions they were like us Habakkuk was living in a very difficult time violence oppression in justice was rampant
Habakkuk was deeply distressed by the circumstances that he was experiencing that he was seeing naturally he wanted to know how long would it be before Jehovah fulfilled the promise he had already given to bring judgment against that wicked system of things
but how Jehovah responded to his faithful prophets questions really can strengthen our confidence in Jehovah
notice in chapter 2 and verse 3 though not obligated to answer what did Jehovah tell him
Habakkuk chapter 2 verse 3 for the vision is yet for its appointed time and it is rushing towards its end and it will not lie
even if it should delay keep in expectation of it for it will without fail come true it will not be laid
a beautiful reassurance from Jehovah wouldn't you agree analyze those words notice first that Jehovah assured Habakkuk that divine judgment was coming Jehovah had not changed his stated purpose and then Jehovah added that there was an appointed or fixed time for that judgment
in effect Jehovah was telling Habakkuk Habakkuk the day of judgment is on my calendar
Jehovah then added more he said that the judgment was rushing towards its end or its fulfillment it would not lie
and as a result of thinking and meditating on those assurances Habakkuk had no reason to be impatient or to give way to despair
in fact instead of criticizing Habakkuk for those very sincere very poignant questions Jehovah encouraged Habakkuk keep in expectation of it wait eagerly for it it will not be laid
well you know it's one thing to receive encouragement but I'm sure you'd agree it's another thing to fully accept it to take it to heart and be nourished at heart by such encouragement
did Habakkuk take Jehovah's response to heart did it encourage him well cast your eyes to chapter two in verse one and you'll notice that Habakkuk's communicating with Jehovah did in fact calm his heart
he resolved to keep waiting confidently and patiently on Jehovah later in chapter three in verse 16 Habakkuk repeated his resolve
when he said that he would quietly wait for Jehovah's day
well what does all of this have to do with you and with me well we live at a time when Jehovah has also appointed a fixed day of judgment
nearly two thousand years ago the father already knew when the end would come according to Jesus
and Matthew chapter 24 verse 36 what had Jehovah already established a day and hour
so that means that the day that you and I eagerly anticipate is on Jehovah's calendar it's been there for a long time
it will come on time at the right time at a time that Jehovah knows to be the best time
and isn't that what we would expect of our best friend Jehovah God the God of love the great time keeper the king of eternity
meditating on the fact that the day and hour is established helps us
renew our resolve to keep waiting patiently on Jehovah
but what if the day seems to be delaying interestingly there in Habakkuk chapter two in verse three
Jehovah himself brought up the subject of a delay it was Jehovah who said even if it should delay
keep an expectation of it well how could the end come on time and yet be delayed
well consider the situation back in Habakkuk's day it was about 100 years earlier that the prophet Isaiah
had foretold that Jehovah would use Babylon to bring a day of judgment now if you or I were in
Habakkuk's sandals how might we have felt from our point of view in during that wicked system of
things it may have well seemed that the day of Jehovah was delaying and if Habakkuk felt that way
then Jehovah's assurances surely comforted him again we noticed that Jehovah didn't criticize him
for asking how long how long twice and why four times no Jehovah took into consideration the pain
of heart of his friend and then reassured him and do you know what happened 20 years later
Jehovah's words were fulfilled Jerusalem was destroyed in 607 BCE so had there really been a delay
not at all that delay was only a perceived one in the mind of Habakkuk of course you and I can look
back through the book of history and see the bigger picture one that Habakkuk simply could not see
fully in his time and what do we see now about that day of judgment in 607 BCE well like a piece
in a very detailed but beautiful puzzle the destruction of Jerusalem came right on time at the
perfect time because that was a pivotal date in the fulfillment of other Bible prophecies prophecies
that have to do with our day during the last days so while Habakkuk may have thought that there was a
delay Jehovah knew better what's the reminder that nourishes our heart this morning
everything linked to Jehovah's grand purpose has always been and will always be in the perfect
control of the great time keeper Jehovah in summary we could conclude from our morning worship
program today that Habakkuk's experience teaches us valuable lessons one Jehovah is not indifferent
to the suffering and the emotional distress of his servants so are you in some emotional distress
or assisting someone else who is don't be afraid to keep pouring out your heart to Jehovah helping
others to do so even repeatedly if needed like Habakkuk wait patiently for the answers the reassurance
that Jehovah will provide remember this too about the salvation that Jehovah has foretold
his salvation for his people is not a temporary solution it's not a bandage on a wound his
solution will completely resolve any and all trials we may be experiencing once they're gone
they're gone for good so how reassuring it is isn't it to know that today we are one day closer
to the fixed day that's on Jehovah's calendar Jehovah's judgments by means of his kingdom will not
be late